So in the chapter on loading data, we saw
how you can export a load function from
your page.server.js and
your layout server.js files.
Well, we can also export page
options from those files.
We can export an SSR bullion,
a CSR bullion, pre-render value,
and a trailing/value, and
these control how the page behaves.
And in the following exercises, we're
gonna learn about each of these in turn.
All of the page options that
we're about to discuss can be
exported from individual pages, or
they can be applied to groups of pages
by exporting them from a layout file.
So if you want some behavior to
apply to your entire application,
you can put it in a route layout.js file.
And then in child pages, you can enable or
disable other aspects of
that behavior as you need.
This allows you to mix and match
different behaviors in your application.
For example,
you can have an application that is
mostly pre-rendered as static HTML, but
has some dynamic pages that are rendered
with personalized data, for example.
And so
this makes SvelteKit very versatile for
whatever kind of application
you're building.
The first one we're gonna
learn about is SSR.
So server-side rendering is the process
of generating HTML on the server, and
it's what SvelteKit does by default.
It's very important for performance and
resilience, it's very beneficial for
search engine optimization, right?
While some search engines cannot index
content that is rendered in the browser
with JavaScript, it happens less
frequently and it happens less reliably.
So SSR is a really
important default to have.
Having said that,
there are some components that
cannot be rendered on the server,
maybe they expect to be able to access
browser globals like window immediately.
And ideally,
you would change those components so
that they can be used on the server,
but sometimes that's just not possible.
So in some situations you might need
to disable server side rendering,
we can do that in a page.server.js,
With export const ssr = false, right?
This will allow this page here to be
rendered without breaking the app.
Because if we were to server
render this without ssr = false,
if you had the default ssr = true, then
we get an internal error when you try and
server render this page, because
window is not available on the server.
This is a component that cannot be
rendered in a server environment.
The counterpart to SSR is CSR.
Client side rendering is what
makes the page interactive.
So here we have a button.
When we click on it,
it's gonna increment the count, right?
It also enables SvelteKit
to update the page upon
navigation without causing
a full page reload.
And you can disable it using a page
option, we'll add a page.server.js file,
I'm gonna export const csr = false, right?
This means that no JavaScript is
getting sent to the client at all,
it also means that our components
are no longer interactive.
If I click on this button,
nothing is going to happen.
So most of the time you're not
going to use this option but
it is a useful way to be able to find
out how your app is gonna behave for
users who, for whatever reason,
cannot use JavaScript.
Okay, let's talk about prerendering.
Prerendering means generating HTML for
a page once at build time rather
than dynamically for
every request that comes into your server.
The advantage of pre-rendering is that
serving static data is extremely cheap and
performant.
So it means that you can serve a very
large number of users without worrying
about things like cache control headers,
which are very easy to get wrong.
But the trade-off is that the build
process will take longer, and so
pre-rendered content can only
be updated by building and
deploying a new version
of the application.
So it's up to you when it's
appropriate to use this.
If you wanna pre-render a page, then you
just export const pre-render = true,
again from your page.server.js.
Right, this isn't gonna have any
observable effect here in the tutorial
because we're running
the application in dev mode and
nothing gets pre-rendered
during development.
This is a thing that happens
when you run NPM, run build.
Not everything can be pre-rendered, right?
If you're building something
that uses dynamic data,
then you can't have an HTML file for that.
Basic rule of thumb is that if any two
users hitting that URL are gonna get
the exact same content
in all circumstances,
then that page is a good candidate for
pre-ordering.
You can't pre-render pages
with dynamic parameters like
earlier when we had /blogs/slug and
square brackets.
We pre-render things like that as
long as SvelteKit can find them,
either by you having specified that in
your Svelte config, or by svelte kit being
able to find links to those pages
from crawling your application.
So if you set pre-render to true
inside your route.layout.server.js,
then you've effectively turned
SvelteKit into a static site generator.
And this is what you would do, for
example, if you're using adapter static,
which is the adapter that
allows SvelteKit to build
applications that can be hosted
on places like GitHub pages.
The final page option that we're
gonna look at is trailing slash.
So two URLs like /foo and
/foo/, they might look the same,
but they are actually very different.
The relative URL like ./bar will
resolve to /bar in the first case,
but /foo/bar in the second,
and search engines will
treat those two URLs as distinct,
which harms your SEO.
So you don't wanna be loose
about your trailing slash,
you wanna pick one and stick to it.
And the default behavior
that SvelteKit chooses is to
remove trailing slashes so
that If you do have a request for
/foo/, SvelteKit will turn
that into a request for /foo.
So we can see that here we have
a bunch of URLs in the navbar, and
if I click on always/ it's
just gonna go to /always.
And these haven't been implemented yet,
so they're all gonna behave the same way.
If we go to the always page.server.js.
And add export const
trailingSlash = 'always',
then now the behavior
is gonna be reversed.
If I navigate to /always/,
that's the URL that I get.
If I navigate to /always
without the slash,
it will end up on the same place.
If you wanna accommodate both
cases which is not recommended,
then you can add the ignore value.
All right, and now if I navigate to
/ignore without the trailing slash,
that's what I'll get there too
if I add the trailing slash.
There are very few situations
where this is appropriate,
most of the time you will be
using either always or never.
And this also affects pre-rendering,
if you have a trailing slash then it will
be pre-rendered as an index.html
file inside a directory.
If the training is removed, then a URL
like /never will become never.html.
And that's something that you might need
to configure with your static web server
if that's how you're
deploying your application.
>> Have you seen people make installable
PWA with Svelte and do you feel like that?
Or have you seen traction with PWAs,
whether it's worth it or
versus building something for
the app store or whatever?
>> It's certainly possible to build
a progressive web app with SvelteKit.
It gives you all the tools that you
need to add a service worker and
you can add a manifest.json
in your static folder.
It also works with a library
called Vite Plugin PWA,
which does a lot of the grunt work for
you.
So absolutely,
it's something that you can do.
I couldn't tell you how widespread that
is, how many people are building things
in that style, but
it's completely achievable.
>> If I understand correctly,
using pre-render true and
layout.server.js is the same
as using an adapter or static.
>> You need to do both.
Essentially, if you use adapter static and
you're not pre-rendering,
then it's gonna yell at you because
it's gonna say, hang on a minute,
we have some non-pre-rendered routes here.
And it'll tell you how to resolve that.
So if you are using Adapter Static,
then you probably want to have export cons
pre-rendered true from your
route layout that server.js.
But there are some situations in which
you might have the bulk of your site
pre-rendered, but then have a few things
that only use client side rendering,
for example.
And so it's not a hard requirement that
every page in your app is pre-rendered if
you are using antistatic.
You can use it to build a fully
rendered single page app, for example.
>> I had a situation where the only way
to find a link to get to some set of
blog posts in a pre-rendered
static site was to click through
a client side post Paginator that
had collapsed page buttons, but
Svelte didn't like through
of the page links.
Is there a way to get some
kind of file manifest for
all routes that's SvelteKit can't find, so
I don't have to make any update
entries data and SvelteKit get config?
>> Yeah, [LAUGH] hold that thought.
So there is a pull request
open on the SvelteKit
repo right now by Elliott Johnson, one
of our core team members that adds a new
export from your page.server.js
files called entries.
This is a function that you define per
route when you have dynamic parameters,
it returns an array of all of
the valid paths for that page.
So if you have something like /blog/slug,
then you can define an entrance function
on that file that will communicate with
your CMS, grab whatever data it needs to,
and then tell the pre-renderer these are
the pages that need to be pre-rendered.
Right now you have to do that
in your Svelte config but
soon you'll be able to do
it in the page itself.